#software-engineering 

Up until now, we have seen how to specify properties using:
- Scala: `assert`, `require` and `ensuring`
- equations between functions (e.g. associativity or abstraction functions)
<br>

We have seen techniques to:
- debug programs
- check assertions during execution (monitoring)
- test programs automatically using [[12.A Automated Testing#Property-Based Testing (PBT)|property-based testing]]
<br>

The problem with these is, that they test program behavior only on a tiny fraction of possible executions.

# Solution: Program Verifiers


> [!example]- Example: Stainless #scala  
> Stainless is a program verifier written in Scala for Scala
> [GitHub](https://github.com/epfl-lara/stainless/)
>
> Example:
> ```Scala
> import stainless.collection._
>
> object Main {
>   def tail(xs: List[BigInt]): List[BigInt] = {
>     require(xs.nonEmpty)
>     xs match {
>       case _ :: t => t
>     }
>   } ensuring {(res: List[BigInt]) => res.length <= xs.length}
> }
> ``` 
> Which can be verified using `stainless main.scala`.

Program verifiers have drawbacks, they can be very slow, if the amount of possibilities to be tested gets large or even infinite.

## Formal Verification
#terminology 

For program verifiers to work, we need *formal verification* a process which relies on rigorous mathematical notion of a system satisfying a specification.
- cover *all* possible behaviors

A verifier uses **logical rules** studied in **formal logic** to take existing theorems and derive new ones.
<br>

To do this, programs and specifications are compiled to *formulas* (~ pure boolean expressions). These formulas are called **verification conditions**.
On these formulas, the verifier can then perform inductive reasoning.

### Soundness and Termination
If a function doesn't *terminate*, any postcondition is by default valid, as it is never reached.
- a key reasoning principle is *function induction*, which gives meaningful properties only when the function terminates
  <br>
- especially important if we use specifications that aren't executed
  <br>

Generally, if a function doesn't terminate, it often indicates an error.

In Stainless, we can use the `decreases` construct to help with this, as it shows the compiler that the given value decreases and thus the function terminates eventually. See [[soft-eng-week13.pdf#page=30|slides 30 - 33]].


