#software-engineering #parallelism

In the following, we look at some requirements to make a function parallel. Also, there will be a quick recap of the Big-O notation.

# Associativity and Commutativity
As we have seen, [[6.1 Parallelism|parallel computation]] splits a task or a [[6.2 Parallel Collections|collection]] into pieces. Depending on how that split is done, we can obtain *different computation trees*, consisting of the same elements.
To ensure a predictable result, we need want all these trees to give the same result. This is ensured by having *only associative operations* when dealing with parallelism.

*Commutativity*, however, is not necessarily needed for parallelism - except if the operation changes the order of elements.
It is not enough for an operation to be commutative, for it to be paralleliseable. It needs to be associative.

---

For example, the *sum of squares*
```
f(x, y) = x² + y²
```
is commutative, but
```
f(f(x, y), z) = (x² + y²)² + z²
f(x, f(y, z)) = x² + (y² + z²)²
```
shows that it is **not** associative.

---

Or, as another example, *floating point addition and multiplication* are also commutative but **not** associative, because of precision limitations.

Addition:
```Scala
> val e = 1e-200
  -> 1.0E-200

> val x = 1e200
  -> 1.0E200

> val mx = -x
  -> -1.0E200

> (x + mx) + e
  -> 1.0E-200 // as x + mx = 0, as expected

> x + (mx + e)
  -> 0.0 // precision error: mx + e = mx, as e is so small
```

Multiplication:
```Scala
> val e = 1e-200
  -> 1.0E-200

> val x = 1e200
  -> 1.0E200

> (e * x) * x
  -> 1.0E200 // as e * x = 1, as expected

> e * (x * x)
  -> Infinity // precision error: x * x equals special value Infinity
```

## Making an Operation Commutative
Suppose there is a binary operation `g` and a strict total ordering `less`, e.g. a lexicographical ordering of bit representations.
Then the following operation is *commutative*:
```Scala
def f(x: A, y: A) = if less(y, x) then g(y, x) else g(x, y)
```

There is however no such trick for associativity

## Associativity on Tuples
Suppose that `f1: (A1, A1) => A1` and `f2: (A2, A2) => A2` are associative, then 
```
f: ((A1, A2), (A1, A2)) => (A1, A2), 
   ((x1, x2), (y1, y2)) -> (f1(x1, y1), f2(x2, y2))
```
is also associative.
<br>

# Big-O Notation (Review)
We say that a function $g(n)$ is $O(f(n))$ (read: *g is Big-O of f*) if there is a constant $M$ and some starting point $n_0 \in \mathbb{N}$ such that
$$ g(n) \; \leq \; M * f(n) $$
for all $n \geq n_0$.

## Example
$100n$ is $O(n^2)$ with $n_0 = 100$ and $M = 1$, but
$100n$ is also $O(n)$ with $n_0 = 0$ and $M = 100$.

We generally state the best $O(f(n))$, thus in the above above example, $100n$ is $O(n)$.