#software-engineering #git 

When using [[1.A Git Basics|Git]] with multiple people, things become complex and confusing quickly. In the following, a short overview is given.

# Single-User Git Recap
Basically a glorified backup using labeled timestamps.
Most common commands:
```bash
git help
git config
mkdir
sbt new scala/scala3.g8
git init
git status
git add
git restore
git commit -m
git log
git show
.gitignore
git commit –amend
git tag -m “…”
git clone
git format-patch
git shortlog --since
git blame
git log -L
```

<br>

# Distributed Git Basics
#basics 

The problem with backups is that they are very limited when it comes to *asynchronous collaboration*, as there are states were the code works and some were it doesn't.

## Remotes
Another Git repository, usually on a public server somewhere (like GitHub), that is tracked and where changes can be pulled from and pushed to.

A *bundle* is also a remote.

List all remotes in the current repository:
```bash
$ git remote -v
origin	git@github.com:mattiamtzlr/EPFL-CS214-Course.git (fetch)
origin	git@github.com:mattiamtzlr/EPFL-CS214-Course.git (push)
```

## Fetching
Retrieve all commits from a remote:
```bash
$ git fetch
```

## Branches
Labels on specific commits, i.e. at a certain timestamp in the version control.

Create a new branch:
```bash
$ git branch new-branch-name
```
Switch to that new branch:
```bash
$ git checkout new-branch-name
Switched to branch 'new-branch-name'
```

Or, both at once:
```bash
$ git checkout -b new-branch-name
Switched to a new branch 'new-branch-name'
```
<br>

Delete a branch:
```bash
$ git branch -d new-branch-name
```
This only works if `new-branch-name` isn't currently active.

## Rebase / Merge
Transfer code across branches, see further down.
Most important commands:
```bash
git am
git cherry-pick
git rebase
git merge
```

<br>

# Short-Term Divergence
Short-term divergence describes a state where two versions conflict each other, usually because of:
- individual contributions happening at the same time,
- 

## Patches

## Cherry-Picks

## Rebases

<br>

# Long-Term Divergence

## Branching

<br>

# Conflict

## 3-Way Diffs

## Conflict Resolution