#scala
# Functional Programming
Functional programming is a paradigm opposed to object-oriented programming.  

## Theories
A theory consists of  

- one or more *data types*
- *operations* on these types
- *laws* that describe the relationships between values and operations

A theory doesn't describe mutations.

For example, the theory of polynomials, defining the sum of two polynomials:
```
(a*x * b) + (c*x + d) = (a + c)*x + (b + d)
```
It doesn't define an operation to change a coefficient while keeping the same polynomial.

In a FP language these are defined using [[1.2 Scala Basics#Definitions / Expressions|expressions]].

### Consequences for functional programming
There's no place for mutations, as the theory doesn't admit it and they can destroy useful laws.  
Therefore, theories for operators are expressed as functions, while avoiding mutations. Functions can be abstracted and composed.

In a restricted sense, a FP language does **not** have mutable variables, assignments, or imperative control structures.
Instead a FP language uses [[1.3 Recursion, Nested Functions#Recursive Functions|recursion]] and other features to achieve the same effect.

Functions in a FP language
- can be defined anywhere
- can be passed as parameters to functions and be returned as results
- can be composed by a set of operators

Expressions must always return a value, as there are no default values. This is especially visible in [[1.2 Scala Basics#Conditionals|if-then-else]] statements or when doing [[3.3 Pattern Matching, Enums#Pattern Matching Syntax|pattern matching]].

FP is effective for concurrency and parallelism, on every scale.