#scala #basics

All non-trivial programming languages provide:
- primitive expressions representing simple elements
- ways to combine and abstract expressions

# REPL (Read-Eval-Print Loop)
The Scala REPL can be started with
```bash
$ scala
```

# Creating a new Scala project
A new project can be created using the following command:
```bash
sbt new scala/scala3.g8
```
Then enter a name when prompted.

# Definitions / Expressions
To define a value in Scala write:
```Scala
def size = 2
```
This defines the value *by name* (see [[#Value Definitions]]).

Definitions can have parameters:
```Scala
def square(x: Double): Double = x * x
def sumOfSquares(x: Double, y: Double): Double = square(x) + square(y)
```

which can then be called as follows:
```Scala
sumOfSquares(3, 5)
```

## Evaluation of expressions
Parameterized functions are evaluated as follows:
1. Evaluate all function arguments, left to right
2. Replace the function call by its result
3. Replace the formal parameters of the function by the actual arguments

This scheme is called the *substitution model*, all it does is *reduce an expression to a value*.

This process can be automated using [[4.A Tracing, Stack Usage|tracing]].

Not every expression reduces to a value however, for example
```Scala
def loop: Int = loop
```
which loops infinitely upon evaluation.

### call-by-value (CBV) vs call-by-name (CBN)
#terminology 

The strategy above is called *call-by-value* which evaluates the arguments first before using them. This has the advantage of only evaluating every argument exactly once.

Another strategy is called *call-by-name* which applies functions to unreduced arguments. This has the advantage of not evaluating arguments which aren't used in the function.

For example if we have the following function:
```Scala
def test(x: Int, y: Int) = x * x
```

Then for the following examples we see the difference between CBV and CBN:

| CBV fastest | CBN fastest | No difference | Expression |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | 
|  O  |  O  |  X  | test(2, 3) |
|  X  |  O  |  O  | test(3+4, 8) |
|  O  |  X  |  O  | test(7, 2*4) |
|  O  |  O  |  X  | test(3+4, 2*4) |

### Termination
Termination of an expression is not always guaranteed (see `loop` expression above), but there are the following rules:
- If CBV evaluation of an expression `e` terminates, then the CBN evaluation of `e` terminates as well.
- The other direction is not true.

Example of an expression that terminates under CBN but not under CBV:
```Scala
def first(x: Int, y: Int) = x

> first(1, loop)
```
which uses the `loop` expression defined above. This will terminate under CBN as the second argument isn't needed in the function body, but will not terminate under CBV as the loop will be infinitely evaluated.

### Scala's approach
Scala normally uses call-by-value. However if the type of a function parameter starts with => it uses call-by-name:
```Scala
def constOne(x: Int, y: => Int) = 1
```
This function just returns constant 1, however the second argument `y` is call-by-name which means that
```Scala
> constOne(1 + 2, loop)
```
will terminate, but
```Scala
> constOne(loop, 1 + 2)
```
will not.

## Conditionals
#control-flow 

Scala has the conditional expression `if-then-else` which is exclusively used in expressions:
```Scala
def abs(x: Int) = if x >= 0 then x else -x
```

Another example, recreating the boolean operators `&&` and `||` (which exist in Scala):
```Scala
def and(x: Boolean, y: => Boolean) = if x then y else false
def  or(x: Boolean, y: => Boolean) = if x then true else y
```
These functions use CBN for `y` to ensure that it is only evaluated when needed.

## Value Definitions
As seen in the beginning the `def` keyword defines a function by-name, meaning it's right-hand side is evaluated on each use.

There is also the `val` keyword which is by-value:
```Scala
val x = 2
val y = square(x)
```
The right-hand side of a `val` definition is evaluated at the time of the definition itself and afterwards the name refers to the value not to the expression.  
Above, `y` refers to `4` not `square(2)`

This also implies that the expression
```Scala
val x = loop
```
will instantly lead to an infinite loop.

# Syntactic Sugar
#syntactic-sugar 

Scala has lots of things which make the language more readable or intuitive but don't actually change how the language works. Such features are called *syntactic sugar*.

## Interpolated strings
One example of such syntactic sugar are *interpolated strings*. These are string literals where values can be inserted conveniently:
```Scala
val x = 5
val a = s"$x times 4 equals ${x * 4}"
```
The string a now holds the value `"5 times 4 equals 20"`.