#scala  #recursion 

To motivate this topic we'll define the function
```Scala
def sqrt(x: Double): Double = ...
```
which calculates the square root of a function using Newton's method.

> [!example]- **Newtons Method**
> To compute `sqrt(x)`:
> - Start with an initial *estimate* `y = 1`.
> - Repeatedly improve the estimate by taking the mean of `y` and `x/y` 
>
> Example `sqrt(2)`:
> ```
> Estimation    Quotient                Mean
> 1             2 / 1 = 2               1.5
> 1.5           2 / 1.5 = 1.333         1.4167
> 1.4167        2 / 1.4167 = 1.4118     1.4142
> 1.4142        ...                     ...
> ```

<br>

# Recursive Functions
First, define a function which computes one iteration step:
```Scala
def sqrtIter(guess: Double, x: Double): Double = 
	if isGoodEnough(guess, x) then guess
	else sqrtIter(improve(guess, x), x)
```
`sqrtIter` is recursive. Recursive functions **need an explicit return type** in Scala.

Second, complete the `improve` and `isGoodEnough` functions:
```Scala
def improve(guess: Double, x: Double) =
	(guess + (x / guess)) / 2

def isGoodEnough(guess: Double, x: Double) =
	// delta because of floating point
	abs((guess * guess) - x) < 0.001
```
where the function `abs` defined in [[1.2 Scala Basics#Conditionals]] is used.

Lastly, define the whole `sqrt` function:
```Scala
def sqrt(x: Double) = sqrtIter(1.0, x)
```
using `1.0` as the first guess.

# Nested Functions
The above defined functions `sqrtIter`, `improve` and `isGoodEnough` do not matter for the usage of the `sqrt` function and should thus not be visible from the outside.

To achieve this and to reduce name-space pollution we can nest the helper functions in the main `sqrt` function:
```Scala
def sqrt(x: Double) = {
	def sqrtIter(guess: Double, x: Double): Double = 
		if isGoodEnough(guess, x) then guess
		else sqrtIter(improve(guess, x), x)
	
	def improve(guess: Double, x: Double) =
		(guess + (x / guess)) / 2
	
	def isGoodEnough(guess: Double, x: Double) =
		// delta because of floating point
		abs((guess * guess) - x) < 0.001

	sqrtIter(1.0, x)
}
```

## Blocks
The above function uses a block, denoted by braces, to define the scope of the sqrt function.  
*The last expression* in a block defines its (return) value.  
A block may appear everywhere an expression can.

### Visibility and Shadowing
The definitions inside a block are only visible from within the block.  
The definitions inside a block *shadow* definitions of the same name outside the block. Definitions outside the block that are **not** shadowed are always visible inside the block.

For instance, the value `result` in the following program has value 16:
```Scala
val x = 0 // outer x = 0
def f(y: Int) = y + 1
val y = {
	val x = f(3) // inner x = 4
	x * x // block value is 16, thus y = 16
}
val result = y + x // 16 + 0
```

Thus, we can further simplify our `sqrt` function, by removing redundant occurrences of the `x` parameter in the nested functions:
```Scala
def sqrt(x: Double) = {
	def sqrtIter(guess: Double): Double = 
		if isGoodEnough(guess) then guess
		else sqrtIter(improve(guess))
	
	def improve(guess: Double) =
		(guess + (x / guess)) / 2
	
	def isGoodEnough(guess: Double) =
		// delta because of floating point
		abs((guess * guess) - x) < 0.001

	sqrtIter(1.0)
}
```
Remember that values are immutable, so this is okay, as `x` never changes.

## Returns
As the last expression of a block is always its return value, explicit returns are almost always wrong.

Instead, to return early from a function, refactor the function into smaller functions and use an `if-then-else` expression.
<br>

# Tail Recursion
## Review: evaluating a function call
A function application / call $f(e_1, \space ..., \space e_n)$ is evaluated as follows:
- The expressions $e_1, \space ..., \space e_n$ are evaluated resulting in the values $v_1, \space ..., \space v_n$.
- The application of the function is replaced with the function body, in which $v_1, \space ..., \space v_n$ replace the formal parameters of $f$.

This can be formalized as a _rewriting of the program itself_:
$$
\text{def} \space f(x_1, \space ..., \space x_n) = B; \space ... \space f(v_1, \space ..., \space v_n)
$$

$$
\text{def} \space f(x_1, \space ..., \space x_n) = B; \space ... \space [v_1/x_1, \space ..., \space v_n/x_n] \space B
$$

Here $[v_1/x_1, \space ..., \space v_n/x_n] \space B$ means the expression $B$ where all occurrences of $x_i$ have been replaced by $v_i$.

## Example 1: gcd
Scala implementation of gcd using Euclid's algorithm:
```Scala
def gcd(a: Int, b: Int): Int =
	if b == 0 then a else gcd(b, a % b)
```
Then, `gcd(14, 21)` is evaluated as follows:
```
gcd(14, 21)
-> if 21 == 0 then 14 else gcd(21, 14 % 21)
-> gcd(21, 14 % 21) -> gcd(21, 14)

gcd(21, 14)
-> if 14 == 0 then 21 else gcd(14, 21 % 14)
-> gcd(14, 21 % 14) -> gcd(14, 7)

gcd(14, 7)
-> ...

gcd(7, 0)
-> if 0 == 0 then 7 else gcd(0, 7 % 0)
-> 7

7
```

## Example 2: factorial
Scala implementation of factorial:
```Scala
def factorial(n: Int): Int =
	if n == 0 then 1 else n * factorial(n - 1)
```
Then, `factorial(4)` is evaluated as follows:
```
factorial(4)
-> if 4 == 0 then 1 else 4 * factorial(4 - 1)
-> 4 * factorial(3)
=> 4 * (3 * factorial(2))
=> 4 * (3 * (2 * factorial(1)))
=> 4 * (3 * (2 * (1 * factorial(0))))
=> 4 * (3 * (2 * (1 * 1)))
-> 24

24
```

## Tail Recursion
In [[#Example 1 gcd|Example 1]] we see that the function follows the same pattern in every recursion step, and ultimately only the last iteration is really needed. This means that the function's _stack frame_ can be reused.  

#terminology 

This type of [[#Recursive Functions|Recursion]] is called **tail recursion**. Tail recursive functions are iterative processes.  
In general, if the last action of a function consists of calling a function (which may be itself), one stack frame would be sufficient for both functions. Such functions are called *tail-calls*.

Even though [[#Example 2 factorial|Example 2]] also calls itself last, the value returned by the recursive call is also multiplied by the current value, which makes using the same stack frame impossible.

### The `@tailrec` annotation
In Scala, only directly recursive calls to the current function are optimized, but using the `@tailrec` annotation, we can require that a function is tail-recursive:
```Scala
import scala.annotations.tailrec

@tailrec
def gcd(a: Int, b: Int): Int = ...
```
which would throw an exception if the implementation of `gcd` were not tail-recursive.