#scala #data-structures 
# Motivational example
To motivate this topic, let's assume that we want to design a package for working with rational numbers.  
A rational number $x/y$ is represented by two integers, the numerator $x$ and the denominator $y$.

# Classes
We can represent the rational numbers using a Scala *class*:
```Scala
class Rational(x: Int, y: Int):
	def numer = x
	def denom = y
```
This marks the exception to the rule of Scala being a purely [[1.1 Background#Consequences for functional programming|functional language]].

The above definition introduces two new entities:
1. A new *type*, named `Rational`
2. A *constructor* `Rational` to create *objects* of this type

These are kept in different namespaces, so there is no ambiguity.

To create an object of `Rational` we use:
```Scala
val x = Rational(1, 2)

> x.numer
	1
> x.denom
	2
```

## Methods
*Methods* are functions operating on a data structure, which are packaged in the data structure itself.  
For our [[#Motivational example|example]] we could define the methods `add`, `sub`, `mul`, `div`, `equal` and `toString`:
```Scala
class Rational(x: Int, y: Int):
	def numer = x
	def denom = y
	def add(that: Rational) =
		Rational(
			this.numer * that.denom + that.numer * this.denom,
			this.denom * that.denom
		)
	def mul(that: Rational) = ...
	...
	override def toString = s"$numer/$denom"
```
where an [[1.2 Scala Basics#Interpolated strings|interpolated string]] is used in the `toString` method.

Methods can then simply be called using:
```Scala
val x = Rational(1, 3)
val y = Rational(5, 7)
val z = Rational(3, 2)

x.add(y).mul(z)
```
### The `override` modifier
The `override` modifier declares that a method should explicitly redefine a method that already exists in the scope. In the above example, `toString` overrides the identically named method in `java.lang.Object`.

## Data Abstraction
The `Rational` implementation we have arrived at so far does not take into account that many rational numbers can be simplified by reducing them to their smallest numerators and denominators. This is done by dividing them both by their GCD.

This can be achieved in the implementation by the following:
```Scala
class Rational(x: Int, y: Int):
	private def gcd(a: Int, b: Int): Int =
		if b == 0 then a else gcd(b, a % b)
	private val g = gcd(x, y)
	val numer = x / g
	val denom = y / g
	...
```
where the values of `numer` and `denom` are divided by the GCD. They are now also stored as `val` to avoid reducing them every time they're used.

This ability to choose different implementations without affecting the clients / users of a class is called *data abstraction* and is a cornerstone of software engineering.

## Preconditions
#syntactic-sugar 

In Scala, *preconditions* can be used to require a certain property of an argument to a function or a value.

### `require`
One of these preconditions is the builtin `require` function, which is meant to enforce a precondition on the caller of a function. The syntax is as follows:
```Scala
require(condition: Boolean[, message: String])
```
If `condition` is false, an `IllegalArgumentException` with the given `message` will be thrown.

For our [[#Motivational example|example]] we could for example require the denominator of a `Rational` to be positive:
```Scala
class Rational(x: Int, y: Int):
	require(y > 0, "denominator must be positive")
```

### `assert`
The other precondition is `assert`, meant to be used to check the code of a function. The syntax is the same as that of `require`:
```Scala
assert(condition: Boolean[, message: String])
```
However, this time an `AssertionError` will be thrown if `condition` is false.

## (Auxiliary) Constructors
#terminology 

Every Scala class implicitly defines a constructor using the passed class parameters. This constructor is called the *primary constructor* of the class and it
- takes the parameters of the class and
- executes all statements in the class body

However, Scala also allows the creation of *auxiliary constructors*. These methods must be named `this` and are defined as follows:
```Scala
class Rational(x: Int, y: Int):
	def this(x: Int) = this(x, 1)
	...
```
This adds an additional constructor to our example about rationals, allowing to simply create rationals with integer values such as `Rational(2)` equaling $2/1$.

## End Markers
When blocks of definitions get very long and deeply nested, it gets hard to see where such a block ends just from indents alone.
Thus, `end` markers exist to make this explicit. In our example they could be used as follows:
```Scala
class Rational(x: Int, y: Int):
	def this(x: Int) = this(x, 1)
	...
end Rational
```
An `end` marker 
- is followed by the name of the definition it terminates and
- it must align with the opening keyword.

They can also be used with `if-then-else` statements, by using `if` as the name of the definition.

## Extensions
When a class has lots of methods all defined within the class, its definition can become very large and the class is no longer very modular.  
To avoid this, methods that don't need to access the internals of a class may be defined in an *extension method*. 

In our [[#Motivational example|example]], we could add the methods `min` and `abs` as extensions:
```Scala
extension (r: Rational)
	def min(s: Rational): Rational = if s.less(r) then s else r
	def abs: Rational = Rational(r.numer.abs, r.denom)
```
This form of defining extensions uses a *companion object of the class*, defined using the keyword `extension`.

Extensions can be used like any other member of the class, however they have the following caveats:
- They can only add new members, not override existing ones.
- They cannot refer to other class members via `this`.

# Object Evaluation
The evaluation of objects is very similar to how functions are normally evaluated, refer to the [[scala-week2.pdf|slides]] for details.