#scala #data-structures #abstraction
# Class Hierarchies
[[2.3 Data and Classes#Classes|Classes]] in Scala can follow hierarchies similar to other languages. For this, multiple concepts are available, described in the following.

## Abstract Classes
*Abstract classes* can contain members who are missing an explicit implementation. This is used to create a kind of "framework" for other classes.
As an example, consider the following abstract class, representing a framework for writing classes representing sets of integers:
```Scala
abstract class IntSet:
	def contains(x: Int): Boolean
	def including(x: Int): IntSet
```

This also means, that it's not possible to directly instance an abstract class, for example an `IntSet()` call would be illegal.

### Class Extensions
Now, let's consider implementing sets as binary trees (why would you do that?). We need two different trees, one representing the empty set, and one consisting of an integer and two sub-trees:
```Scala
class Empty() extends IntSet:
	def contains(x: Int): Boolean = false
	def including(x: Int): IntSet = NonEmpty(s, Empty(), Emtpy())

class NonEmpty(elem: Int, left: IntSet, right: IntSet) extends IntSet:
	def contains(x: Int): Boolean =
		if x < elem then left.contains(x)
		else if x > elem then right.contains(x)
		else true

	def incl(x: Int): IntSet =
		if x < elem then NonEmpty(elem, left.incl(x), right)
		else if x > elem then NonEmpty(elem, left, right.incl(x))
		else this
end NonEmpty
```
#### Terminology
In the above example `Empty` and `NonEmpty` both *extend* the class `IntSet`. This implies that they *conform* to the type `IntSet`.
An object of type `Empty` or `NonEmpty` can be used wherever an object of type `IntSet` is required.

In our example about integer sets, the class `IntSet` is the *superclass* of `Empty` and `NonEmpty`. Conversely, `Empty` and `NonEmpty` are *subclasses* of `IntSet`. 

In Scala, any user-defined class extends another class, even if none is given explicitly, as the standard class `java.lang.Object` is assumed.

All direct or indirect superclasses of a class `C` are called the *base classes* of `C`.
Thus, the base classes of `NonEmpty` include `IntSet` and `Object`.

### Implementing and Overriding


### Objects and Companions

### Dynamic Binding


## Programs

## The `main` Method


## Packages


### Imports
Imports don't have to be at the top of the program, they could for instance be in a method, if the imported stuff is only used there.

## Special Types

# Scala and Object-Oriented