#scala #data-structures #abstraction 
# Traits
In Scala, classes can only have one superclass (like in Java). However, if a class has several natural supertypes to which it conforms or from which it wants to inherit code, a *trait* can be used.
A trait is declared just like an [[3.1 Hierarchies, Objects#Abstract Classes|abstract class]] but with the keyword `trait` instead of `abstract class`:
```Scala
trait Planar:
	def height: Int
	def width: Int
	def surface = height * width
```
As the above example shows, traits can have implemented methods as well as non-implemented ones.

Classes, objects and traits can inherit from arbitrary many traits.

# Decomposition - Example: Expressions
To motivate this topic, let's assume the following example:
Suppose, we want to create a small interpreter for arithmetic expressions, which we will restrict to numbers and additions for simplicity.
Expressions could be represented as a [[3.1 Hierarchies, Objects#Class Hierarchies|class hierarchy]], with a base trait `Expr` and two subclasses, `Number` and `Sum`:

## Approach 1: Lots of Definitions
```Scala
trait Expr:
	def isNumber: Boolean
	def isSum: Boolean
	def numValue: Int
	def leftOp: Expr
	def rightOp: Expr

class Number(n: Int) extends Expr:
	def isNumber = true
	def isSum = false
	def numValue = n
	def leftOp = throw Error(”Number.leftOp”)
	def rightOp = throw Error(”Number.rightOp”)

class Sum(e1: Expr, e2: Expr) extends Expr:
	def isNumber = false
	def isSum = true
	def numValue = throw Error(”Sum.numValue”)
	def leftOp = e1
	def rightOp = e2
```
For this approach, we could then write an evaluation function as follows:
```Scala
def eval(e: Expr): Int =
	if e.isNumber then e.numValue
	else if e.isSum then eval(e.leftOp) + eval(e.rightOp)
	else throw Error(”Unknown expression ” + e)
```

### Problems
This approach is hardly scalable (pun intended), adding more expressions, for example for a product operation, adds exponentially more definitions and methods.

## Approach 2: Type Tests and Casts
A "hacky" solution for the above problems could use type tests and type casts, which have the following syntax in Scala:
```Scala
def isInstanceOf[T]: Boolean
def asInstanceOf[T]: T
```
The use of these methods is highly discouraged however, explaining the rather unfriendly syntax.

## Solution 1: Object-Oriented Decomposition
#terminology 

If we restrict ourselves to only *evaluating* expressions, we can solve our problem quite elegantly using *object-oriented decomposition*:
```Scala
trait Expr:
	def eval: Int

class Number(n: Int) extends Expr:
	def eval: Int = n

class Sum(e1: Expr, e2: Expr) extends Expr:
	def eval: Int = e1.eval + e2.eval
```
When we now want to evaluate an expression we can use the [[3.1 Hierarchies, Objects#Dynamic Binding|dynamically bound]] method `eval` defined on every class.

OO-decomposition...
- ...mixes data and operations on the data
	- This can be a good thing if there is a need for both *encapsulation* **and** *data abstraction*

- ...increases complexity in its literal sense, by weaving together several concepts which should maybe not be mixed. 
	- It also adds new dependencies to classes.

- ...makes it easy to add new kinds of data but hard to add new kinds of operations on that data.

### Limitations
OO-decomposition only works well with operations on a *single* object. If we wanted to simplify our expressions for example:
```
a * b + a * c   =>   a * (b + c)
```
we would run into a problem, as this is a non-local simplification. It cannot be encapsulated in the method of a single object.