#scala #control-flow #data-structures 
# Pattern Matching
For this topic, we'll continue using the [[3.2 Traits, Decomposition#Decomposition - Example Expressions|example about expressions]] devised earlier.
As a reminder, we are trying to create a [[3.1 Hierarchies, Objects#Class Hierarchies|class hierarchy]] for representing simple mathematical expressions and their evaluations.
We have arrived at the following solution so far which uses [[3.2 Traits, Decomposition#Solution 1 Object-Oriented Decomposition|object-oriented decomposition]]:
```Scala
trait Expr:
	def eval: Int

class Number(n: Int) extends Expr:
	def eval: Int = n

class Sum(e1: Expr, e2: Expr) extends Expr:
	def eval: Int = e1.eval + e2.eval
```
However, we are still running into some problems.

## Solution 2: Functional Decomposition using Pattern Matching
So far, the main problem we have been facing is *reversing* the construction process by trying to figure out 
- which subclass was used, and
- what the arguments of the constructor were.

As this situation is very common, there's a feature in Scala called *pattern matching* to help.

### Case classes
A *case class* definition is similar to a normal class definition, but it is preceded by the modifier `case`. For our example we can do the following:
```Scala
trait Expr
case class Number(n: Int) extends Expr
case class Sum(e1: Expr, e2: Expr) extends Expr
```
This defines, as before, a trait `Expr` and two subclasses `Number` and `Sum`, which are now however empty. Thus, we need to write an `eval` function.

### Pattern Matching Syntax
Pattern matching is a generalization of `switch` in C / Java to class hierarchies. It's expressed using the `match` keyword, and we can use it to write our `eval` function:
```Scala
def eval(e: Expr): Int = e match
	case Number(n)   => n
	case Sum(e1, e2) => eval(e1) + eval(e2)
```
The general syntax is as follows:
```Scala
selector match
	{case pattern => expression}
```
Each *case* associates an *expression* with a *pattern*.
As Scala is functional, a `MatchError` will be thrown if no pattern matches the value of the selector.
<hr>

Patters can be constructed from:
- *constructors*, e.g. `Number`, `Sum`
- *variables*, e.g. `n`, `e1`, `e2`
- *wildcards*, `_` (a single underscore)
- *constants*, e.g. `1`, `true`
- *type tests*, e.g. `n: Number`

Variables always begin with a lowercase letter and the same variable name can only appear once in a pattern ("someone is working on this though" - Odersky).
Names of constants begin with a capital letter, except `null`, `true`, `false`.

### Evaluation of Match Expressions
Match expressions of the form
$$ \text{e} \ \ \text{match} \  \{ \ \text{case} \ p_1 \Rightarrow e_1 \ ...  \ \text{case} \ p_n \Rightarrow e_n \ \}$$
matches the value of the selector $e$ with the patterns $p_1, \ ..., \ p_n$ in the order in which they are written.
The whole match expression is rewritten to the RHS of the first successful match.

### What do Patterns Match?
- A constructor pattern $C \, ( \, p_1, \ ..., \ p_n \, )$ matches all the values of (sub-)type $C$ that have been constructed with arguments matching $p_1, \ ..., \ p_n$. It then binds these arguments to $p_1, \ ..., \ p_n$ for further use.
- A variable pattern $x$ matches **any** value, and *binds* the name of the variable to this value.
- A constant pattern $c$ matches values that are equal to $c$, in the sense of `==`.

# Enums
#data-structures 

In our above example, we have seen how to model data with class hierarchies, in our case mathematical expressions:
```Scala
trait Expr

object Expr:
	case class Var(s: String) extends Expr
	case class Number(n: Int) extends Expr
	case class Sum(e1: Expr, e2: Expr) extends Expr
	case class Prod(e1: Expr, e2: Expr) extends Expr
```
Here, all the case classes have been put into the [[3.1 Hierarchies, Objects#Objects and Companions|companion object]] of `Expr` as to not pollute the global namespace.

#terminology 

As there are no methods defined in the above classes, they are *pure data*, and a definition like this is called an *algebraic data type* or *ADT* for short.
As they are very common in functional programming, Scala offers some special syntax:

## Enums for ADTs
An *enum (enumerator)* enumerates all the cases of an ADT and nothing else. For instance we can recreate our example using an enum:
```Scala
enum Expr:
	case Var(s: String)
	case Number(n: Int)
	case Sum(e1: Expr, e2: Expr)
	case Prod(e1: Expr, e2: Expr)
```
which is equivalent to the previous definition but more compact.

### Pattern Matching on ADTs
Now we can use pattern matching to write our `eval` (which stays the same) and our `show` function:
```Scala
def show(e: Expr): String = e match
	case Expr.Var(x) => x
	case Expr.Number(n) => n.toString
	case Expr.Sum(a, b) => s"${show(a)} + ${show(a)}}"
	case Expr.Prod(a, b) => s"${showP(a)} * ${showP(a)}"

// to correctly generate parentheses around sums
def showP(e: Expr): String = e match
	case sum: Expr.Sum => s"(${show(sum)})"
	case _ => show(e)
```

## Simple Enums
Cases of enums can also be simple values, without any parameters, for example a `Color` type:
```Scala
enum Color:
	case Red, Green, Blue
```
where we can even combine several simple cases in one list.

### Pattern Matching on Simple Enums
For pattern matching, these simple cases count as constants:
```Scala
enum DayOfWeek:
	case Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, Saturday, Sunday

import DayOfWeek.*
def isWeekend(day: DayOfWeek) = day match
	case Saturday | Sunday => true
	case _ => false
```

## Enums with Parameters and Methods
Enums can become even more useful if parameters and methods are added to them. Take for example an enum for directions:
```Scala
enum Direction(val dx: Int, val dy: Int):
	case Up extends Direction( 0, 1)
	case Right extends Direction( 1, 0)
	case Down extends Direction( 0, -1)
	case Left extends Direction(-1, 0)

	def rightTurn = Direction.values((ordinal + 1) % 4)
end Direction
```
where `ordinal` returns the index of the case in the enum. Cases start with 0 and are numbered consecutively in order of definition.
This only applies to simple cases though.
Enum cases that pass parameters have to use an explicit `extends` clause.