#scala #abstraction #data-structures 
# Type Parameters
So far, we have only ever used lists of integers (usually called `IntList`). What if we wanted general lists for all sorts of types?

> [!info]+ Note
> Lists are discussed in greater detail [[4.3 Scala Lists, Tuples#Scala Lists|here]]. 
> For now, they are just used as an example.

For this we use *generics* and especially: *type parameters*
The general syntax to define a type parameter is the following:
```Scala
trait List[T]
case class Nil[T]() extends List[T]
case class Cons[T](head: T, tail: List[T]) extends List[T]
```
The `[T]` is approximately equal to Java's `<T>` syntax.

To then instantiate such a generic class, simply put the wanted type into the square brackets:
```Scala
val l = Cons[Boolean](true, Cons[Boolean](false, Nil[Boolean]()))
```

## Generic Functions
Like classes, functions can also have type parameters:
```Scala
def singleton[T](elem: T) = Cons[T](elem, Nil[T]())
```
Which we can then use like this
```Scala
val ans = singleton[Int](42)
val hello = singleton[String]("Hello, World!")
```

However, the Scala compiler can often *infer* the correct type parameters from the value arguments:
```Scala
val ans = singleton(42)
val l = Cons(true, Cons(false, Nil()))
```

### Example: n<sup>th</sup> Element of a List
The following function returns the n<sup>th</sup> element of a given list:
```Scala
def nth[T](l: List[T], n: Int): T = l match
	case Nil() => throw IndexOutOfBoundsException()
	case Cons(h, t) =>
		if n == 0 then h
		else nth(t, n - 1)
```
This works by recursively going through the list and checking if the "counter" `n` has reached zero yet. It's not terribly efficient.

## Type erasure
#terminology 

Type parameters should not affect program evaluation. Thus we can assume that all type parameters and arguments are removed before evaluating the program.
This process is called *type erasure* and is done in many languages such as Java, Scala and Haskell.

# Polymorphic HOFs
To further increase the usefulness of higher-order functions they can even be made generic and thus *polymorphic*.

To motivate this topic, we'll use the below example of lists, as they have multiple methods benefiting of higher-order functions already.

## Example: Lists
In lists, we can identify several recurring patterns, like,
- transforming (mapping) all elements in a certain way,
- filtering a list using a criterion (a *predicate*),
- combining elements using an operator.

These can all benefit from polymorphic higher-order functions, which **may** make their code clearer.

### Mapping
An easy way to define polymorphic mapping is the following:
```Scala
extension [T](l: List[T])
	def map[U](f: T => U): List[U] = l match
		case Nil    => l
		case h :: t => f(h) :: t.map(f)
```
which is defined as a method on the `List[T]` class and can thus be used as follows:
```Scala
def scaleList(l: List[Double], factor: Double) =
	l.map(x => x * factor)
```

### Filtering
Also very nicely generalizable is the notion of filtering by a given condition:
```Scala
extension [T](l: List[T])
	def filter(p: T => Boolean): List[T] = l match
		case Nil    => l
		case h :: t => if p(x) then h :: t.filter(p) else t.filter(p)
```
Again, a possible use-case:
```Scala
def positives(l: List[Int]): List[Int] = 
	l.filter(x => x > 0)
```

### Folding and Reduction
Another very common operation is combining elements of a list using an operator.
There are technically two versions of this, `foldLeft` (which is the stronger variant) and `reduceLeft` which is based on `foldLeft`.
The difference between the two is that `foldLeft` takes an additional parameter, called the *accumulator*, `z`, which is always part of the equation as well.
```Scala
abstract class List[T]:
	...
	def foldLeft[U](z: U)(op: (U, T) => U): U = this match
		case Nil    => z
		case h :: t => t.foldLeft(op(z, x))(op)

	def reduceLeft(op: (T, T) => T): T = this match
		case Nil    => throw IllegalOperationException()
		case h :: t => t.foldLeft(x)(op)
```
These can the be used like this:
```Scala
def sum(l: List[Int])     = l.foldLeft(0)(_ + _)
def and(l: List[Boolean]) = l.foldLeft(true)(_ && _)
```

There are also `foldRight` and `reduceRight` versions of these methods which are discussed in detail on [[scala-week4.pdf#page=69|slides 69 to 72]].