#scala #data-structures 

Using combinatorial operations on collections is usually shorter and simpler than using a recursive approach.
However, it is **terrible from a performance standpoint**, as we often construct very large collections, even though we only need a small part of it.

# Lazy Lists
#terminology 

We can make such code efficient by using this trick.
> Avoid computing the elements of a sequence until they are needed for the evaluation result, which might never be the case.

This idea is implemented in the `LazyList` class. A `LazyList` is similar to a normal `List`, but its elements are evaluated only *on demand*.
This is in contrast to the other two evaluation strategies, [[1.2 Scala Basics#call-by-value (CBV) vs call-by-name (CBN)|by-value and by-name]] seen until now.

## Defining Lazy Lists
Lazy lists are defined from a constant `LazyList.empty` and a constructor `LazyList.cons`, for example:
```Scala
val lazyXs = LazyList.cons(1, LazyList.cons(2, LazyList.empty))
```
which is equivalent to
```Scala
val lazyXs = 1 #:: 2 #:: LazyList.empty
```
thanks to the `x #:: xs` alias for `LazyList.cons(x, xs)`.

--- 

Alternatively, they can be defined using the `LazyList` object as a factory:
```Scala
val lazyXs = LazyList(1, 2)
```

---

The `to(LazyList)` method will turn the collection it has been called on into a lazy list:
```Scala
> (1 to 1000).to(LazyList)
  -> val res0: LazyList[Int] = LazyList(<not computed>)
```

## Operations on Lazy Lists
`LazyList` supports almost all methods of `List`, such as `range`, `filter`, etc.
See [[4.3 Scala Lists, Tuples#Operations on Lists]] for more information.

## Implementation of Lazy Lists
For simplicity, we can think of lazy lists as being implemented similarly to normal lists but with the tail parameter for the `LazyList.cons` constructor being passed *by-name*:
```Scala
object TailLazyList:
  def cons[T](hd: T, tl: => TailLazyList[T]) = new TailLazyList[T]:
    def isEmpty = false
    def head = hd
    def tail = tl
    override def toString = ”LazyList(” + hd + ”, ?)”

  val empty = new TailLazyList[Nothing]:
  	def isEmpty = true
  	def head = throw NoSuchElementException(”empty.head”)
  	def tail = throw NoSuchElementException(”empty.tail”)
  	override def toString = ”LazyList()”
```
This, however means, that the tail will be evaluated every time someone calls `tail` on a `TailLazyList` object, which isn't truly lazy.

Thus, the *real implementation* of `LazyList` uses a lazy `tail`, a lazy `head` as well as a lazy `isEmpty` method.
To do this, it maintains a lazy `state` variable:
```Scala
class LazyList[+T](init: => State[T]):
  lazy val state: State[T] = init

enum State[T]:
  case Empty
  case Cons(hd: T, tl: LazyList[T])
```

The `lazy val` construct is described in the following.
<br>

## Lazily Traversing Lists
When we want to *lazily use traversal methods* such as `foldRight` on a list, we have to make sure that the function `f` passed to `foldRight` takes it's second parameter *by-name*:
```Scala
extension [A](xs: List[A])
  def foldRight[B](z: B)(f: (A, => B) => B): B = xs match
    case Nil => z
    case x :: xs1 => f(x, xs1.foldRight1(z)(f))
```
Like this, the evaluation only continues as long as it is needed, which would be important if we implemented functions like `exists` using `foldRight`.
<br>

# Lazy Evaluation
#terminology 

As briefly mentioned above, problems related to lazy collections can be solved by *caching* a result instead of recomputing it every time it's needed.
This optimization is still sound from a functional standpoint, as the expression still produces the same result every time it's evaluated.

This scheme is called **lazy evaluation** or **by-need** evaluation.
It kind of sits "between" by-value (strict, value gets assigned immediately) and by-name (value gets recomputed every time) evaluation.

## The Scala Approach
Scala uses strict evaluation by default but allows lazy evaluation of value definitions using the `lazy val` construct:
```Scala
lazy val x = expr
```

### Example
Lazy evaluation can sometimes cause seemingly weird behavior, consider for example the following expression:
```Scala
def expr = {
  val x = { print("x"); 1 }
  lazy val y = { print("y"); 2 }
  def z = { print("z"); 3 }

  z + y + x + z + y + x
}
```

Upon evaluating it we get:
```Scala
> expr
  -> xzyz
```
This is due to the following chain of evaluations:
1. `x` gets evaluated and assigned immediately because it is defined using `val`.
   -> first character: `x`
   <br>
2. `z` gets called first in the last line, and is evaluated as it is defined using `def`.
   -> second character: `z`
   <br>
3. `y` gets called next and is lazily evaluated once.
   -> third character: `y`
   <br>
4. `x` gets called next, but has already been evaluated and assigned, thus no character gets printed.
   <br>
5. `z` gets called next and is evaluated again as it is defined using `def`.
   -> fourth character: `z`
   <br>
6. `y` get called next but has already been lazily evaluated and is thus not evaluated again. No character gets printed. 
   <br>
7. `x` gets called next, but has already been evaluated and assigned, thus no character gets printed.
   <br>
   